NICAR 2014: Thursday
====================

## The next generateion of data viz
Speaker: Alberto Cairo

Insight and Enlightenment: the future of news viz

The future of data viz
slides will be on website

* Graph TV - allwos you to search for TV shows and see imdb ratings, showing trends, and which episodes are highest rated.
* Esteve Boix: Visualisaing Buffy: A project in which you can see how much time each character spendins on screen. How do the students gather the info? By hand. Done in D3.

Question: Do they represent the present or the future of visualisation. They do in terms of tools. At start of career, was rare to find an editor who knew how to code, but this is becoming more common. 

When we talk about hte futre of viz, we focus too much on the tech side of viz. These are important but 
Only focus on tools that create a layer on top of these libraries.

I'm not against learning code. I do believe all should learn the basics. But I fell behidn because I learned to code in ActionScript. We could talk about Steve Jobs and how much I thate him.

** prediction 1**

Designers and journalists  (and not just data journalists) will beome better at using numbers and evidence

We have the mandidate and mission 

Data journalists and infographics and viz designers can lead the way and helf raise the numeracy and visual skills of both their colleagues and the public.

Recent map about 50% of the GDP generated by small number of counties. 

This eg of something that happens a lot: Oversimplication. Just show you the averages. Don't show the complexity in the data or write the story that shows the complexity behind the headline.

If only show average scores of school system, you also need to report the districbution of the data, standard devs etc. We have teh obligation to point out things that are wrong.

Critiques of other stories are important. Even if you only have a basic understanding of statistics.

Variations that lie within the margin of error. Look for 

A number or variable in isolation doesn't mean anything. Only becomes interesting if you put it into comparison with something else.

We should be critiquing the work of our colleagues, and be open to receiving those critiques ourselves.

Patternicity: Finding meaningful patterns in meaningless noise. (Michael Shermer and Daniel Kahneman).

The first priciple of journlaism is that yo umust not fool yourself -- and you are the easiset person to fool (Richard Feyman)

Ukraine narratives in US papers are based on patternicity.

eg, Ukraine is a divided country, east-west. Very clear pattern on maps. Protests are all in the pro-wesetern side. Assumption that the country will split.

Wapo and NYT published very clear split between east and west of UKraine. Is this real, and is this real. **But this is an oversimplictifction**

If you look into the detail, the eastern part of the country is also protesting against the government.

Example: JOhn Snow cholora map
He didn't just pay attention to the data that confirmed his hypothesis?

Danger of data viz: confirmation bias.
What other variables could disprove

**Preditcion 2**
Return to the foundations of viz. Five things that define a great viz:

* Truthful (ppl between "the truth" and "being truthful")
* Functional (the graphical forms you use to encode your data should be appropriate to the data -- many designers chose what they like rather than what is appropriate. It is not that function dictats form, but the function of teh graphic constrains teh variety of forms that you can use to encode your data. )
* Is beautiful: Univ Miami makes mandatory desing class for journalism students, even if they want to be writer. 
* Insightful: Many graphics are just data dumps. (ie exploration vs explaination)
* Enlightening: Tells me something I didn't know before. Many designers focus too much on the beauty thing. That is extremely important but "we need to fear the consequenceds of our work more than we love the cleverness of our ideas" (Mike Monteiro)

Be an innovator: risk is an important.
("Our readers will not understand this complex graphic")
Many stats charts would not have happened if William Playford lived today.
HOWEVER: be a sceptic of innovation.

Washington Post graphic: relationship between wealth of a country winning medals. Is a vewy fun graphic. But hte problem is that after early stage of excitedment, itis frustrating to extract the pattern or compare countries.

bar graph is the best way to show comparisons. 

** prediction 3 **
We will emberace the idea that deisngers can encode theiir data more than once.
NY Times graphic of how people spend their time. First view makes it possible to see all the categories. But hard to compare the relative sizes. If you click on one category, it drops to the base line so you can see change on this.

Univ Wisconsin cartography: 50yerasofchange.com
Multiple representations of dataset. There multiple views of the same data.

** prediction 4 **

dsigners will learn that writing is as important as drawing. It's not just a vis rep of data. It's a symbyois of data an visual. Projects sometimes fail because they are not annotated. Vizualisation is something to be read, but 
What is interesting in the Twitter language map is the EXCEPTIONS, not the previously known fact that French people tweet in French.
Simple NYT scatterplot: The simplist graphics often impress me ths most. Invesrs relationships between breast cancer and breat cancer mortality, probably because casess go undetected in developing countrie.s
They sequenced the graphic so that it guides you through the graphic. There is a

** prediction 5 **
Data-drive motion graphcis will be everyewhwere

** prediction 6 **
Proficiency in technologis is not a goal in itself.
projects are amazing if they are useful for readers. Not because the designer can show off his technical skills.



